Peter: I think we all have a fairly hazy idea
about what ethics is. We believe intrinsically
that ethics is a good thing. My knowledge
of the topic is incredibly limited, so I'd
like to introduce my colleague professor Doug
Baker, who knows way more about ethics than
I do. Welcome Doug!
Doug: Thank you, Peter. A pleasure to be here.
Peter: So Doug, I don't have a crisp sense
of what ethics is. When I hear the word ethics,
I think of all kinds of things; right and
wrong, good and evil, morals, values, behaviors.
Can you untangle some of these things for
me?
Doug: Yes. I think Peter, when I teach ethics,
I like to first start off with teaching what
ethics is not.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: To start off on the negative, usually
that's not a good thing, but I start off on
the negative. What it is not; is that it's
not values. It is not religion. It is something
fundamentally, that underlies all of society,
it underlies all of religion and it transcends culture.
Peter: So all societies, all religions, all
cultures? It's a global thing?
Doug: Its global. It is actually the philosophy
of morality and it offers us a guide. Ethics
offers us a guide as to the right thing to
do.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: And so, values are a constellation of
beliefs, an amalgam of who we are, and it's
culturally specific values and it's contextually
specific. In other words, the values within
Australian culture in say 1800 are quite different
than the values in Australian culture now.
Peter: But have ethics changed over the time?
Doug: No, but values change.
Peter: So it's an interpretation?
Doug: Values set the norms of the culture,
and they are a way of enforcing ethics. But
ethics transcends them, to all cultures as
I said. So, values again are continuous to
time, but that doesn't change in terms of
ethics. What ought to be the right thing to
do, what is the right thing to do is determined
by moral reasoning.
Peter: So people have been thinking about
ethics for a long, long time, maybe the longest
activity or topic that people have thought
about. Do they all agree?
Doug: No. But, listen, there are degrees in
ethical theory. It is a huge area and in terms
of how we proceed ethically, there's generally
two different schools of thought. There's
teleology and there's deontology, and if we
look at those two different schools of thought
in terms of moral reasoning, they'd come to
how we should proceed and how we ought to
act differently.
Peter: Okay so run me through these two.
Doug: Okay. So first teleology looks at the
good thing, the right thing to do; what's
good in the end, and it looks at the process
of getting what's good, and the argument with
teleology is, we proceed into the future by
doing the right thing and producing the greatest
good. And so, the argument in it is, it's
not the process but the product, and it's
also called consequentialism. And in terms
of the utilitarians Bentham and Mill in the
1840's, 1850's and 1860's, utilitarianism
is brought in this branch of ethics by looking
at the greatest good for the greatest number.
So, whatever you do should build the largest
degree of happiness, so the end result is
what comes.
Peter: So it's not about the individual, it's
about the greater good?
Doug: Correct.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: Yeah, exactly right. So, if we build
a dam for power, the objective is to build
an industrial reservoir for power for the
industrialisation of a nation, and the fact
that we have to move out two hundred farmers
or a couple of villagers doesn't matter.
Peter: Because of the greater good?
Doug: It's what counts.
Peter: Okay. So, in an engineering term then,
you'd say that would depend on your cost function.
It would depend on the weights that you applied
to electricity and to the happiness of the village.
Doug: Absolutely. And so, it becomes a case
of measuring market and non market variables.
But the greatest good for the greatest number
is often the argument you see in a lot of
mega projects. That, yeah we know, we know
we have to affect you here and we know this
community's getting impacted but, for the
greater number, it's important.
Peter: Tell me about the other branch.
Doug: The other branch really looks at the
process. Deontology is a whole area of thought,
starting with can't and moving forward right
through the rolls, that looks at the process,
and the argument is that the process and the
good are separated. So what is good is separate
from the correctness of the process.
Peter: It's how you get there?
Doug: Correct.
Peter: Okay
Doug: So the argument is in fact how we do
it, it's critical, and that moral guidance
as to how we do it makes the difference.
Peter: Can you give me an example.
Doug: So in terms of public participation,
the argument is, for example, any government
would actually, when they have a large project
in their mind go ahead and do it in the past.
But now we have a process by which to inform
the public, to integrate the public, to make
the decisions as to whether this is the best
path to go, and more people are involved in
the decision making process, and as a result
public participation and stakeholder participation
is bloomed as a result of this. But the key
with this branch - deontology; John Rawls
is probably the most well known philosopher
of the 20th Century, really looked at a theory
of justice, and the argument was, what counts
here is justice for the individual, and we
base our decisions on what's right for the
individual and not to harm the individual.
Peter: Okay so one branch then is the greater
good of however we might define that, other
branch is what's best for the individual.
Doug: Absolutely.
Peter: So I can pick and choose? No one of
both ethics is better than the other?
Doug: Correct. And you can justify it accordingly.
For example, in consequentialism when you
look at positive discrimination, in other
words a preferential hiring of say, first
nations or aboriginal people over top of other
applicants, or the hiring of women over the
top of men, in preference to men. Now the
argument is that positive discrimination is
justified in a consequentialist argument,
in that there has been problems in the past
with respect to how we treated women and how
we fired. We can rectify that in the present
by specifically focusing on hiring them and
violating the principle of justice, but the
end result is that we'll have 50% women in
the work place.
Peter: Yeah.
Doug: You're with me? So that's a consequentialist
argument. Now a deontologist would take offence
to that, because you're violating fairness.
And so, a consequentialist's perspective then
has the end result in mind, and again the greater good in mind. So you can argue from both sides.
Peter: So Doug, given all of that, how do
I put ethical thinking into practice?
Doug: There's no formula but there's a fundamental
kind of basis for all moral codes.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: It hinges around again, the individual
and the rights of the individual. First there's
the construct of autonomy - the right of the
individual to make their own choice and not
to violate that. Secondly, there's a construct
of maleficence - to do no harm.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: And it's the ethical code that surrounds
doctors. It's formed around non-maleficence.
Then there's beneficence, which is to help,
to aid. Secondly, or lastly, there's this
notion of justice and that's Rawls approach. You must have fairness. The fairness principle is critical.
Peter: Is fairness an absolute concept?
Doug: Yes, it is. And it can be weighed if
you look at the utilitarian theory and Pareto
economics - they lay fairness in that construct,
in terms of what is fair and what isn't and
how do we determine fairness. So, it translates,
much of this ethical theory translates directly
into economic theory and utilitarian theory.
So it's fascinating how it's all brought in
and through it into the how we see the world
and how we evaluate the world.
Peter: So it's not just some abstract notion,
it can be put into practice and it underpins
really important things in our society.
Doug: Absolutely! There's nothing more applied
than a good ethical theory.